BGP Control Plane (#18860)
cilium-team/cilium: pkg/bgpv1/README.md

 - localASN: 64512
   exportPodCIDR: true
   neighbors: # []CiliumBGPNeighbor
	 - peerAddress: 'fc00:f853:ccd:e793::50/128'
	   peerASN: 64512
```

#### Fields
``` 
nodeSelector: Nodes which are selected by this label selector will apply the given policy
 
 virtualRouters: One or more peering configurations outlined below. Each peering configuration can be thought of as a BGP router instance.
	
	virtualRouters[*].localASN: The local ASN for this peering configuration
	
	virtualRouters[*].exportPodCIDR: Whether to export the private pod CIDR block to the listed neighbors
	
	virtualRouters[*].neighbors: A list of neighbors to peer with
		neighbors[*].peerAddress: The address of the peer neighbor
		neighbors[*].peerASN: The ASN of the peer	
```

*note*: *setting unique configuration details of a particular instantiated virtual router on a particular Cilium node is explained in [Virtual Router Attributes](#Virtual Router Attributes)*

## Creating  a BGP Topology

### Rules

The following rules must be adhered to for a `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` to correctly apply to a node.

- Only a single `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` can apply to a `Cilium` node. 

> 	* If the `BGP Control Plane` on a node iterates through the `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` CRs currently written to the cluster and discovers (n > 1) policies match its labels, it will return an error and remove any existing BGP sessions. Only (n == 1) policies **must** match a node's label sets.

Reviewer: I have a concern for this behavior. If I read this sentence (and the code) correctly, when the user mistakenly applies the wrong configuration over the existing configuration, that immediately withdraws the route from the peer. So, they will experience immediate connectivity disasters.

How about leaving the existing BGP session as is when the user applies the new policy over the existing policy and reporting the error with log (or k8s resource event) to the users?

I'm sure this will cause confusing behavior when users applied three or more policies (we don't have any spec for the "ordering" of policies), but still better than causing a connectivity issue.

Author: This was disccused with @joestringer during CFP process.

The idea was to fail-fast in the user's staging environments so that the issue is known ahead of time and can be fixed. 

Down to revisit this behavior tho.

refs: https://github.com/cilium/cilium/pull/18860#discussion_r829712717

Reviewer 2: Yeah my goal here is to say "if there is conflicting configuration, make it clear to the user as quickly as possible". One of the other background problems that I see is that if we attempt to allow one of the configurations to stay, and then we restart the Cilium agent, then we cannot deterministically figure out which configuration should apply to continue the connectivity that was present before the restart. So, instead of causing the user to understand the problem when they introduce the bad configuration, they may only find the problem upon Cilium restart or upgrade, at which point it is less clear why the BGP sessions suddenly failed. This would be more difficult to trace back to the origin of the problem (conflicting user configuration).

In an ideal world, maybe we could support multiple configurations at once. But also, I don't think we have specific use cases in mind for this just yet, and it is more complicated to implement such support. So I'm quite OK with this behaviour to withdraw the connections as soon as there is conflicting configuration from the user.

# Cilium BGP Control Plane

## Usage

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

### Options

```

Currently a single flag in the `Cilium Agent` exists to turn on the `BGP Control Plane` feature set.

```
--enable-bgp-control-plane=true
```

When set to `true` the `BGP Control Plane` `Controllers` will be instantiated and will begin listening for `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` events.

### CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy CRD

All `BGP` peering topology information is carried in a `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` CRD. 

`CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` can be applied to one or more nodes based on its `nodeSelector` fields. 

> A Cilium node may only have a single `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` apply to it and if more then one does, it will apply no policy at all.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Cilium node may only have a single `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` apply to it and if more than one does, it will apply no policy at all.
```

Reviewer 3: Note: There are a few other occurrences of `more then`, although I didn't spot them the first time.

Author: cool, think I got them.

Author: incoming force push with note fixes.

Each `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` defines one or more `CiliumBGPVirtualRouter` configurations.

When these CRDs are written or read from the cluster the `Controllers` will take notice and perform the necessary actions to drive the `BGP Control Plane` to the desired state described by the policy.

The policy in `yaml` form is defined below:

```yaml
apiVersion: "cilium.io/v2alpha1"
kind: CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy
metadata:
 name: 01-bgp-peering-policy
spec: # CiliumBGPPeeringPolicySpec
 nodeSelector:
   matchLabels:
     bgp-policy: a
 virtualRouters: # []CiliumBGPVirtualRouter
 - localASN: 64512
   exportPodCIDR: true
   neighbors: # []CiliumBGPNeighbor
	 - peerAddress: 'fc00:f853:ccd:e793::50/128'

> 	   peerASN: 64512

Reviewer 3: mixed indentation, should be spaces only?

```

#### Fields
``` 
nodeSelector: Nodes which are selected by this label selector will apply the given policy
 
 virtualRouters: One or more peering configurations outlined below. Each peering configuration can be thought of as a BGP router instance.
	
	virtualRouters[*].localASN: The local ASN for this peering configuration
	
	virtualRouters[*].exportPodCIDR: Whether to export the private pod CIDR block to the listed neighbors
	
	virtualRouters[*].neighbors: A list of neighbors to peer with
		neighbors[*].peerAddress: The address of the peer neighbor
		neighbors[*].peerASN: The ASN of the peer	
```

> *note*: *setting unique configuration details of a particular instantiated virtual router on a particular Cilium node is explained in [Virtual Router Attributes](#Virtual Router Attributes)*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Note*: *Setting unique configuration details of a particular instantiated virtual router on a particular Cilium node is explained in [Virtual Router Attributes](#Virtual Router Attributes)*
```

> ## Creating  a BGP Topology

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Creating a BGP Topology
```

> ## Creating  a BGP Topology

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Creating a BGP Topology
```

### Rules

> The following rules must be adhered to for a `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` to correctly apply to a node.

Reviewer 3: Maybe something simpler to read?
```suggestion
Follow the rules below to have a `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` correctly apply to a node.
```

- Only a single `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` can apply to a `Cilium` node. 
	* If the `BGP Control Plane` on a node iterates through the `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` CRs currently written to the cluster and discovers (n > 1) policies match its labels, it will return an error and remove any existing BGP sessions. Only (n == 1) policies **must** match a node's label sets.
	* Administrators should test a new BGP topology in a staging environment before making permanent changes in production.

> ```mermaid

Reviewer 3: This, and  the explanatory sentence below it, should probably be indented if they relate to the first bullet point in the list? Otherwise, it breaks the list?

Author: This one I don't quite understand. 

I think the mermaid diagram explains all three above points, they all deal with the situation where a policy will not apply.

Reviewer 3: What I meant is that, as far as I remember, this:

```
* foo
  * bar

'''
some code, for example Mermaid
'''
explaining here that this diagram is awesome

* baz
```

... renders differently from:

```
* foo
  * bar
    ```
    some code, for example Mermaid
    ```
    explaining here that this diagram is awesome
* baz
```

The difference being that, in the first case, there are two distinct lists, with the code/diagram between them, whereas in the second case it is part of the list (part of one of the bullet items).

Given that you were providing a set of rules to follow, I thought that the remaining items below the diagrams were also part of this list, and that it would look better maybe to have a single list with the diagram part of it, instead of separate lists. But maybe I was wrong.

Author: Ah, I do think that hte diagram is a general explanation of the points above.

flowchart LR
	subgraph K ["Kubernetes Cluster"]
		subgraph P1 ["CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy [Label=A]"]
			node1("Cilium-01 [Label=A,B]"):::error
		end
		subgraph P2 ["CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy [Label=B]"]
			node2("Cilium-01 [Label=A,B]"):::error
		end
	end
classDef error fill:darkred,color:white;
classDef kBg fill:steelblue,color:white;
classDef pBg fill:lightblue;
class K kBg;
class P1,P2 pBg
```

The above diagram demonstrates the aforementioned error case. 

> Cilium-01 will not apply any `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` since both policies match its label set. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Cilium-01` will not apply any `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` since both policies match its label set. 
```

> - Within a `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` each `CiliumBGPVirtualRouter` defined must have a unique `localASN` field.

Reviewer 3: Please pick a symbol (`-` or `*`) for unordered lists and stick to it consistently

Author: cool, swapped them all to '*'

	- A node cannot host two or more logical routers with the same local ASN. Local ASNs are used as unique keys for a logical router.
	- A node can define the remote ASN on a per-neighbor basis to mitigate this scenario.  See `CiliumBGPNeighbor` CR sub-structure.
* IPv6 single stack deployments **must** set an IPv4 encoded `routerID` field in each defined `CiliumBGPVirtualRouter` object within a `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy`
	* Cilium running on a IPv6 single stack cluster cannot reliably generate a unique 32 bit BGP router ID, as it defines no unique IPv4 addresses for the node. The administrator must define these IDs manually or an error applying the policy will occur.
	* This is explained further in [Virtual Router Attributes](#Virtual Router Attributes)
	

> ### Defining topology

Reviewer 3: Consistency: title case

			end
		end
		rt((BGP Router)):::r
		node1 -->|peer| rt
		node2 -->|peer| rt
		node3 -->|peer| rt
	classDef n fill:lightblue;
	classDef r fill:lightyellow;
	classDef p fill:steelblue,color:white;
	class id2 p
```

It is also possible to provide each `Kubernetes` node its own `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` by giving each node a unique label and creating a `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` for each unique label. 

This is illustrated in the diagram below with each node is provided its own policy which peers to their own 

```mermaid
flowchart TB
	subgraph A["Kubernetes Cluster"]
		subgraph id3 ["CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy Selector:[Label=C]"]
			node3("Cilium-03 Label=C"):::n
		end
		direction TB
		subgraph id2 ["CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy Selector:[Label=B]"]
			node2("Cilium-02 Label=B"):::n
		end
		subgraph id1 ["CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy Selector:[Label=A]"]
			node1("Cilium-01 Label=A"):::n
		end
	end
	rt1((BGP Router-01)):::r
	rt2((BGP Router-02)):::r
	rt3((BGP Router-03)):::r
	node1 -->|peer| rt1
	node2 -->|peer| rt2
	node3 -->|peer| rt3
classDef n fill:lightblue;
classDef r fill:lightyellow;
classDef p fill:steelblue,color:white,font-size:11px;
class id1,id2,id3 p
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

Here and elsewhere in the doc

By showing a unified topology (former diagram) and a segregated topology (latter diagram) it should be apparent that any combination of the two is possible. 

> This allows for selecting subsets of nodes which peer to a particular BGP router while another subset of nodes peer to a separate BGP router,  akin to an "AS-per-rack" topology.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This allows for selecting subsets of nodes which peer to a particular BGP router while another subset of nodes peer to a separate BGP router, akin to an "AS-per-rack" topology.
```

### Virtual Router Attributes

A `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` can apply to multiple nodes. 

When a `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` applies to one or more nodes each node will instantiate one or more BGP routers as defined by the list of `CiliumBGPVirutalRouter`.

However, there are times where fine-grained control over an instantiated virtual router's configuration needs to take place. 

To accomplish this a Kubernetes annotation is defined which applies to Kubernetes Node resources.

A single annotation is used to specify a set of configuration attributes to apply to a particular virtual router instantiated on a particular host.

> The syntax of the annotation is as follows:

Reviewer 3: Can you please group your sentences into logical paragraphs instead of doing one line + blank line per sentence? (Wrapping would help readability in my opinion, although it can be a matter of preferences.)

Author: Sentence per line is typically a good practice for markdown: https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint/issues/81

Reviewer 3: That's debatable. There's a trade-off on readability.

But you're missing my point. If you have one sentence per line on consecutive lines, I'm fine with it, they still form a single paragraph in Markdown. If you separate them with blank lines every time, they all count as distinct paragraphs, including in the generated documentation. We end up with HTML doc which is less consistent and harder to read. What's the gain in having blank lines every time?

Author: Ah I see. Okay.

I think the document is very comprehendable as is, however I will add a link to this specific issue in my "bgp PR follow up issue" and take on restructuring the prose a bit with your concern.

Reviewer 3: thanks!

```
	cilium.io/bgp-virtual-router.{asn}="key=value,..."
```

The `{asn}` portion should be replaced by the virtual router's local ASN you wish to apply these configuration attributes to.

The following sections outline the currently supported attributes.

*note*: *each following section describes the syntax of applying a single attribute, however the annotation's value supports a comma separated lists of attributes and applying multiple attributes in a single annotation is supported.*

> *note*: when duplicate `key=value` attributes are defined the last one will be 

Reviewer 3: Consistency: Your other `note` are in italics

When the `BGPControlPlane` evaluates a `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` with a `CiliumBGPVirtualRouter` it also searches for an annotation which targets the aforementioned `CiliumBGPVirtualRouter` local ASN. 

If found it will use the provided router ID and not attempt to use the IPv4 address assigned to the node.

#### Local Listening Port

By default the `GoBGP BGPRouterManager` will instantiate each virtual router without a listening port. 

It is possible to deploy a virtual router which creates a local listening port where BGP connections may take place. 

If this is desired the following annotation can be provided

```
cilium.io/bgp-virtual-router.{asn}="local-port=45450"
```

## Architecture

The `BGP Control Plane` is split into a `Agent-Side Control Plane` and a `Operator-Side` control plane (not yet implemented).

Both control planes are implemented by a `Controller` which follows the `Kubernetes` controller pattern. 

Both control planes primary listen for `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` CRDs, long with other Cilium and Kubernetes resources useful for implementing a BGP control plane. 

## Agent-Side Architecture

> ## Component Diagram

Reviewer 3: Please review the level of those titles. “Agent-Side Architecture” should likely be under “Architecture” (level 3), and “Component Diagram” likely under it (level 4)?

The interface defines a single declarative method whose argument is the desired `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` (among a few others).

The `BGPRouterManager` is in charge of pushing the `BGP Control Plane` to the desired `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` or returning an error if it is not possible.

### GoBGP Implementation

The first implementation of `BGPRouterManager` utilizes the `gobgp` package. 

You can find this implementation in `pkg/bgpv1/gobgp`. 

This implementation will 
- evaluate the desired `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy`
- create/remove the desired BGP routers 
- advertise/withdraw the desired BGP routes 
- enable/disable any BGP server specific features
- inform the caller if the policy cannot be applied

The GoBGP implementation is capable of evaluating each `CiliumBGPVirtualRouter` in isolation. 

This means when applying a `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` the GoBGP `BGPRouterManager` will attempt to create each `CiliumBGPVirtualRouter`.

If a particular `CiliumBGPVirtualRouter` fails to instantiate the error is logged and the `BGPRouterManager` will continue to the next `CiliumBGPVirtualRouter`, utilizing the aforementioned logic.

#### GoBGP BGPRouterManager Architecture

> Its worth expanding on how the `gobgp` implementation of the `BGPRouterManager` works internally. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is worth expanding on how the `gobgp` implementation of the `BGPRouterManager` works internally. 
```

Author: Got it, tho I've been changing these to "It's".

This `BGPRouterManager` views each `CiliumBGPVirtualRouter` as a BGP router instance. 

Each `CiliumBGPVirtualRouter` defines a local ASN, a router ID and a list of `CiliumBGPNeighbors` to peer with.

This is enough for the `BGPRouterManager` to create a `BgpServer` instance, which is the nomenclature defining a BGP speaker in `gobgp`-package-parlance. 

This `BGPRouterManager` groups `BgpServer` instances by their local ASNs. 

This leads to the following rule:
- A `CiliumBGPPeeringPolicy` applying to node `A` must not have two or more `CiliumBGPVirtualRouters` with the same `localASN` fields.

The `gobgp` `BGPRouterManager` employs a set of `ConfigReconcilerFunc`(s) which perform the order-dependent reconciliation actions for each `BgpServer` it must reconcile. 

A `ConfigReconcilerFunc` is simply a function with a typed signature. 

```go
type ConfigReconcilerFunc func(ctx context.Context, m *BGPRouterManager, sc *ServerWithConfig, newc *v2alpha1api.CiliumBGPVirtualRouter, cstate *agent.ControlPlaneState) error

> ```` 

Reviewer 3: quadruple backquote should be triple
